= RVC - Ruby vSphere Console

== Introduction

RVC is a console UI for VMware ESX and VirtualCenter. The vSphere object graph
is presented as a virtual filesystem, allowing you to navigate and run commands
against managed entities using familiar shell syntax. RVC doesn't (yet) have
every feature vSphere Client does, but for common tasks it can be much more
efficient than clicking through a GUI.

== Installation

    gem install rvc

To upgrade to the latest version: <tt>gem update rvc</tt>

== Usage

  % rvc 192.168.1.105
  username: Administrator
  password:
  0 dc (datacenter)
  192.168.1.105:/> cd dc/host/192.168.1.100/
  192.168.1.105:/dc/host/192.168.1.100/> ls
  0 host [192.168.1.100] (host): cpu 2*2*2.81 GHz, memory 2.00 GB
  1 resourcePool [Resources]: cpu 4.35/4.35/normal, mem 0.48/0.48/normal
  192.168.1.105:/dc/host/192.168.1.100/> ls host/vms/
  0 foo: poweredOn
  192.168.1.105:/dc/host/192.168.1.100/> i host/vms/foo
  name: foo
  host: dc/host/192.168.1.100/192.168.1.100
  tools: guestToolsNotRunning
  VC UUID: 5259d5d2-b767-43c9-db6d-fbf5cc4b6f02
  power: poweredOn
  cpus: 1
  memory: 128 MB
  nics:
   Network adapter 1: "VM Network" connected 00:0c:29:c6:5d:2a 
  192.168.1.105:/dc/host/192.168.1.100/> off host/vms/foo
  PowerOffVM foo: success
  192.168.1.105:/dc/host/192.168.1.100/> quit

Enter "help" to see a list of all available commands.

All RVC commands exist in modules, and may optionally have aliases. For
example, the command to power off a VM is actually "vm.off", since it exists in
the "vm" module, but since it is a common operation it has been aliased to
"off".

== Paths

All vm operations need a full path, or relative path, rather than just the
name of the resource. So to create a VM you would use:

	/> vm.create -p /vm1/ha/host/hosta/resourcePool/pools/dev/ -d
		/vm1/ha/datastore/datastore1 /vm1/ha/vms/newvm

== Features

=== Tab-completion

Commands and paths can be tab completed in the usual fashion. Whitespace must
be escaped with a backslash.

=== Wildcards

Many commands such as "vm.on" can operate on multiple objects at once. RVC
supports simple globbing using "*" as well as advanced regex syntax. To use a
regex, prefix the path element with "%". For example: "vm.on myvms/%^(linux|windows)"
will power on VMs whose names start with "linux" or "windows" in the "myvms" folder.
Note that it is necessary to explicitly anchor the pattern with "^" and "$" if you
wish to match the whole path element.

=== Marks

  192.168.1.105:/> mark a dc/vm/foo
  192.168.1.105:/> on ~a
  PowerOnVM foo: success
  192.168.1.105:/> off ~a
  PowerOffVM foo: success

Marks allow you to save a path for later use. Refer to a mark by prefixing its
name with a tilde. The "ls" command automatically creates numeric marks for
each object listed; these are the numbers in the first column. As a special
case, you don't need to use a tilde with numeric marks. The "cd" command
automatically creates the mark "~~" pointing to the previous directory. If a
mark reference is input instead of a command then RVC will cd to the marked
object. Thus, "~~" is a convenient way to toggle between two directories.

When the working directory is a descendant of a Datacenter object, the mark "~"
refers to the Datacenter. For example "~/datastore" is a convenient way to get
the datastore folder of the current datacenter.

=== Aggregate marks

More than one object can be given to the "mark" command. The resulting mark can
be used with any command that accepts multiple objects. The "mark.edit" command
opens up an editor showing the objects referenced by the given mark and allows
you to remove some or add more.

=== Ruby mode

Beginning an input line with "/" causes RVC to treat it as Ruby code and eval
it. This gives you direct access to the underlying RbVmomi library. If the line
"//" is input then RVC will toggle between shell and Ruby mode.

Marks can be easily used in Ruby mode since there are magic variables with the
same names. Since some marks, like numeric ones, aren't valid variable names,
they also exist with a "_" prefix. By default only the first object in an
aggregate mark will be returned; to get an array of them all use the '!'
suffix.

The methods "this", "conn", and "dc" are provided in Ruby mode, returning the
current object, connection, and datacenter respectively. The connection object
is an instance of RbVmomi::VIM.

=== VMODL introspection

The "type" command can be used to display the properties and methods of a VMODL
class. For example: "type Datacenter".

In Ruby mode, a '#' at the end of the input line will display the output of the
"type" command for the resulting object's class. This is very useful for
exploring the vSphere API.

=== Multiple connections

RVC can connect to more than one ESX or VC server at the same time. Simply add
more hosts to the command line, or use the command "connect". Each connection
is represented by a top-level node in the virtual filesystem. If more than one
host is given on the command line, RVC will start in the root of the filesystem
instead of automatically cd'ing to a connection.

== VNC Clients
=== OSX
Using homebrew https://github.com/mxcl/homebrew install tiger-vnc using the
command 
	
	"brew install tiger-vnc"

this will allow you to use the vnc.view command

== Extensibility

RVC is designed to let users easily add commands they need. You can create a
command module, or add to an existing one, by adding a Ruby file to ~/.rvc or
any directory on the RVC_MODULE_PATH environment variable. The syntax of a user
command module is the same as those built-in to RVC, so see the
"lib/rvc/modules" directory for examples.

If you create a generically useful RVC command, please consider sending in a
patch so everyone can use it.

== Development

Send patches to rlane@vmware.com, or fork the project on GitHub and send me a
pull request. RVC developers hang out in #rvc on Freenode.
